all right good afternoon today's speaker
is Peter Thiel Peter was the founder of
PayPal and Palantir and founders funds
and is invested in most of the tech
companies in Silicon Valley and he's
going to talk about strategy and
competition thank you for coming here
awesome thanks Sam thanks for inviting
me thanks for for having me I I sort of
have a I have a single-day Beeks that
I'm completely obsessed with in on the
business side which is that if you're
starting a company if you're the founder
entrepreneurs starting a company you
always want to aim for monopoly and and
that and you want to always avoid
competition and so hence competition is
for losers something we'll be talking
about today I'd like to I'd like to
start by saying something about the the
basic idea of when you start one of
these companies how you go about
creating value and this is this question
what makes a business valuable and I
want to suggest that there's basically a
very simple very simple formula that you
you have a valuable company two things
are true number one that it creates X
dollars a value for the world and number
two that you capture Y percent of X and
and the critical thing that that I think
people always miss in the sort of
analysis is that x and y are completely
independent variables and so X can be
very big Y can be very small X can be of
intermediate size and if Y is reasonably
you big you can still get a very big
business so to create a valuable company
you have to basically both create
something of value and capture some
fraction of the value of what you've
created and sort of just to just to
illustrate this is a as a contrast
there's if you sort of compare the US
airline industry with a company like
Google on search if you sort of measured
by the
size of these industries you could you
could say that airlines are still more
important than search if you just
measure it say by revenues there's 195
billion in domestic revenues in 2000
2012 Google had just north of 50 billion
and this and so and certainly sort of on
some intuitive level if you said you
were given a choice and said well do you
want to get rid of air all air travel or
do you want to get rid of your ability
to use search engines the intuition
would be that air travel is something
that's more important than search this
is a course of just the domestic numbers
you looked at this globally airlines are
much much bigger than um then then then
searcher than Google is but but the
profit margins are quite a bit less you
know they were marginally profitable in
2012 I think the entire hundred year
history of the airline industry the
cumulative profits in the US have been
approximately zero no companies make
money they episodically go bankrupt they
get recapitalized and you sort of cycle
and repeat and this is reflected in you
know the the combined market
capitalization of the of the airline
industries maybe something of the US
airline industry something like a
quarter that of Google so so you have
you have a search engine much much
smaller than than air travel but much
more valuable I think this reflects
these very different valuations on x and
y so you know if we look at perfect
competition you know there are sort of
there's some pros and cons to the world
of perfect competition on a high level
it's always this is what you study an
econ one it's always it's easy to model
which i think is why econ professors
like talking about perfect competition
on it somehow is efficient especially in
a world where things are static because
you have all the consumer surplus gets
captured by everybody and and
politically it's what what we're what
we're told is good in our society that
you want to have competition and this is
somehow a good thing of course there are
a lot of negatives it's it's generally
not that good if you're you're you're
involved in anything that's hyper
competitive because you often don't make
money I'll come back to this a little
bit later so so I think at one end
spectrum you have industries that are
perfectly competitive and at the other
end of the spectrum you have things that
I would say are monopolies and and
they're you know they're much stable
longer-term businesses you have more
capital and and if you get a creative
monopoly for inventing something new
I think it's symptomatic of having
created something something really
valuable and so I do think this you know
the the sort of the the extreme binary
view of the world I I always articulate
is that there are exactly two kinds of
businesses in this world there are
businesses that are perfectly
competitive and there are businesses
that are monopolies and there's
shockingly little that is in between and
this dichotomy is not understood very
well because people are constantly lying
about the nature of the businesses
they're in and this is why this is in my
mind this is the most important it's not
necessarily the most important thing in
business but I think it's the most
important business idea that people
don't understand that there are just
these two kinds of businesses and so let
me say a little bit about the lies that
people tell and so you basically on the
basic if you sort of imagine that there
was a spectrum of companies from perfect
competition to monopoly the the apparent
differences are quite small because the
people who have monopolies pretend not
to they will basically say you know and
it's because you don't want to get
regulated by the government you don't
want the government to come after you so
you will never say that you have
monopoly so anyone who has a monopoly
will pretend that they're in incredible
competition and on the other end of the
spectrum if you are incredibly
competitive and if you're in some sort
of business where you will never make
any money you will be tempted to tell a
lie that goes in the other direction
where you will say that you're doing
something unique that is somehow less
competitive than it looks because
because you want it you will want to
differentiate you want to try to attract
capital or something like that so if the
monopolist pretend not to have
monopolies the Naumann Oppel is pretend
to have monopolies the apparent
difference is very small whereas
the real difference I would submit is is
actually quite baguette so there's this
distortion that happens because of the
lies people tell about their businesses
and the lies are sort of in these these
opposite direction let me let me drill a
little bit down further on the the way
these lies work and so you know the the
the basic lie you tell as a non
monopolies is that we're in a very small
market the basic law you tells the
monopolies is that the market you're in
is much bigger than it looks
and so and so typically if you want to
think this in sort of set theoretic
terms you could say that a monopoly
tells a lie where you describe your
business as the union of these vastly
different markets and the anon
monopolist describes it as the
intersection so that in effect if you're
if you're non monopolist you will
rhetorically describe your market as
super small you're the only person in
that market if you have monopoly you
will describe it as super big and and
there's lots of competition in it so
some examples of how this how this works
in practice so I always use restaurants
as the example of a terrible business
there's always that you know sort of my
idea is that you know capitalism and
competition are antonyms capitals
someone accumulates capital world of
perfect competition is a world where all
the capital gets competed away so you're
opening a restaurant business no one
wants to invest because you just lose
money so you have to tell some
idiosyncratic narrative and you will say
something like well we're the only
British food restaurant in Palo Alto
so it's British Palo Alto and and of
course that's too small a market because
people may be able to drive all the way
to Mountain View or even Menlo Park and
there probably are no people who eat
nothing but British food at least no
people are still alive and so so that is
um that's that's a sort of a
fictitiously
narrow market there's there's sort of a
Hollywood version of this where the way
movies always get pitched is you know
okay it's like a college football star
you know
joins an elite group of hackers to to
catch the shark that killed his friend
sorry and so that's now that is a movie
that has not yet been made but but but
the question is is is that the right
category or is the correct category it's
just another movie in which case you
know there are lots of those it's super
competitive incredibly hard to make
money no one ever makes money in
Hollywood doing movies or it's really
really hard and so you always have this
question about does the intersection
does it is it real does it make sense
does it have value that one should ask
and of course there are startup versions
of this where you and the sort of the
bat really bad versions you just take a
whole series of buzz word sharing mobile
social apps you combine them and you
have some kind of narrative and whether
or not that's a real business or not is
is a is it's generally a bad sign so
it's almost this pattern recognition
when you have this rhetoric of this sort
of intersections it generally does not
work the something of somewhere is
really mostly just the nothing of
nowhere and it's like the Stanford of
North Dakota one of a kind but it's not
Stanford so let's look at the opposite
the opposite lie is if you are let's say
the the search company that's down the
street from here and has about a happy
66 percent market share and is you know
it's completely dominant in the search
market google has not just almost never
describes itself as a search engine
these days um and instead it it
describes itself in all these different
ways so it sometimes says it's an
advertising company so if it was
searched and say wow that's it's like
it's it has this huge market share
that's really really crazy so it's like
a incredible monopoly it's much bigger
than its much a much more robust
monopoly than Microsoft ever had in the
90s maybe that's why it's making so much
money but if you if you say it's an
advertising market you could say well
there's search advertising is 17 billion
and that
part of online advertising which is much
bigger and then you know all US
advertising is bigger and then by the
time you get to global advertising
that's close to 500 billion and so
you're talking about three and a half
percent so a tiny part of of this much
larger market or if you don't want to be
an advertising company you can always
say that you're a technology company and
so sorry
and so the and and so and and the
technology market is something like a
one trillion dollar market and the
narrative that you tell is Google in the
in the technology market is well we're
competing with all the car companies
with our self-driving cars
we're competing with Apple on TVs and
iPhones we're competing with Facebook
we're competing with Microsoft on on
office products we're competing with
Amazon on cloud services and so we are
in this giant technology market where
there's competition in every direction
you you look and no we're not the
monopoly the government's looking for
and we should not get regulated in any
way whatsoever and so I think one has to
always be super aware that there are
these these very powerful incentives to
to distort the nature of these markets
one way or the other so um you know the
the evidence of narrow markets in the in
the tech industry is is if you basically
just if you look at sort of the some of
the big tech companies Apple Google
Microsoft Amazon they just um they've
just been building up cash for year
after year and you have these incredibly
high profit margins and I would I would
say that the that one of the reasons the
tech industry in the US has been has
been so successful financially is
because it's it's prone to creating all
these monopolies like businesses and
that's that's and it's reflected by the
fact that these companies just
accumulate so much cash they don't even
know what what to do with it beyond a
certain point
and so so let me say let me say a few
things about about how to how to build a
monopoly and I think I think the one of
the sort of very counterintuitive ideas
that comes out of this monopoly thread
is that you want to go after small
markets if you're a startup you know you
want to get to monopoly you starting a
new company you want to get to
monopolies monopolies you have a large
share of a market how do you get to a
large share of a market you start with a
really small market and you take over
that whole market and then and then over
time you find ways to expand that market
in in concentric circles and the thing
that's always a big mistake is going
after a giant market on day one because
that's typically evidence that that you
somehow haven't define the categories
correctly that the and it's it normally
means that there's going to be too much
competition in one way or another and so
I think almost all the successful
companies in Silicon Valley
had some model of starting with small
markets and expanding and you know if
you take Amazon you start with you start
with you know just a book store we have
all the books in the world so it's it's
a it's a it's a better book store than
anybody else has in the world when it
starts in the 90s it's online there's
things you can do you can't do before
and then you gradually expand into all
sorts of different forms of e-commerce
and other things beyond that you know
eBay you start with Pez dispensers you
move on to beanie babies and eventually
it's it's all these different auctions
for all these sorts of different goods
and and what was very counterintuitive
about what's very counterintuitive about
many of these companies is they often
start with markets that are so small
that people don't think they don't think
that they're valuable at all when when
you get started the the PayPal version
of this was was when we started with
with power sellers on eBay
which was about 20,000 people
when we first saw this happening in
December of 99 January 2000 right after
we launched there was a sense that that
these were all it was such a small
market it was terrible we thought these
were terrible customers to have it's
just people selling junk on the Internet
why in the world do we want to be going
after this market but but you know you
there was a way to get a product that
was much better for everybody in that
market you could and we got to something
like 25-30 percent you know market
penetration in two or three months and
you got some walk in you got brand
recognition and you're able to to build
the business from there so um so I
always think these on these these very
small markets are quite underrated the
Facebook version of this I always give
is that if the initial market at
Facebook was ten thousand people at
Harvard it went from zero to sixty
percent market share in ten days that
was a very auspicious start on the way
this gets analyzed in business schools
is always that's ridiculous as such a
small market it can't have any value at
all and so I think the Business School
analysis of Facebook early on or of
PayPal early on or of eBay early on is
that the markets were perhaps so small
as to have almost no value and they
would have had little value had they
stayed small but it turned out there
were ways to them grow them concentric
Li and that's what made them that's what
made them so valuable now I think the
opposite version of this is always where
you have super big markets and and I
there's so much so many different things
that went wrong with all the clean tech
companies in the last decade but but one
one theme that ran through almost all of
them was they all started with massive
markets and every clean tech PowerPoint
presentation that one saw in the years
2005 to 2008 which is sort of the clean
tech bubble and in Silicon Valley
started with we're in the energy market
we're in a market that's measured in
hundreds of billions or trillions of
dollars and and then you know once
you're sort of a a minnow in a vast
ocean that's not a good place to be that
means you have tons of competitors and
you don't even know who all the
competitors are and so you want to be
you know you want to be a one of a kind
company where it's the only one in a
small ecosystem you don't want to be the
fourth online pet food company you don't
want to be the tenth thin film solar
panel company you don't want to be the
hundredth restaurant in palo alto new
restaurant industries a trillion-dollar
industry so if you do a market size
analysis you conclude restaurants are a
fantastic business to go into and it's
often large markets large existing
markets typically mean that you have
tons of competition very very hard to to
differentiate so the first very
counterintuitive into idea is is to go
after small markets often markets that
are so small people don't even notice
them they don't think they make sense
that's where you got to put hold and
then and then if those markets are able
to expand you can scale into a big
monopolies business you know it's um a
second sort of there's sort of several
different characteristics of these
monopolies businesses that I like to
focus on and there's probably no no sort
of single formula to it now I always
think that that in technology there's
always a sense that you know the history
of technology such that every every
moment happens only once and so you know
the next Mark Zuckerberg won't build a
social network the next the next Larry
Page won't be building a search engine
the next Bill Gates when we're building
an operating system and if you're
copying these people you're not learning
from them but it's it's and so there is
always these very unique businesses that
are doing something that's not been done
before end up end up having the
potential to be a monopoly if you're you
know the opening the opening line in
Anna Karenina is that all happy
companies sorry all happy families all
happy families are alike all unhappy
families are unhappy in their own
special way and the opposite is true in
business where I think all happy
companies are different because they're
doing something very unique all unhappy
companies are alike because they fail to
escape the essential sameness that is
competition and so so one one sort of
characteristic of a monopoly technology
company is some sort of proprietary
technology my sort of krei
a somewhat arbitrary rule of thumb is
you want to have a technology that's an
order of magnitude better than the next
best thing so Amazon had over 10 times
as many books and it's maybe not that
high-tech but you figure out a way to
sell 10 times as many books in an
efficient online way you know PayPal the
alternative for PayPal was using was
using cheques to send money on eBay took
7 to 10 days to clear PayPal could do it
more than 10 times as fast so you want
to have some sort of very very powerful
improvement in some in some order maybe
an order of magnitude improvement on
some key dimension of course you know if
you if you actually come with something
totally new it's it's just it's just
like an infinite improvement so I would
say the the iPhone was the first
smartphone that worked and so that's you
know that's like maybe not infinite but
it's sort of definitely an order of
magnitude or more of an improvement so I
think the the technology is designed to
give you a massive Delta over over the
next the next best thing I think I think
there often are Network effects that can
kick in that really help the thing
that's very and these these leaked
monopolies over time the thing that's
very tricky about network effects is
they're often they're often very hard to
get started and so so even though
everyone understands how valuable they
are there's always this incredibly
tricky question why is it valuable to
the first person who's doing something
economies of scale if you have something
that with very high fixed costs very low
marginal costs that's typically a
monopoly like business and then then
there's this thing of branding which is
sort of like just this idea that gets
lodged in people's brains I ever quite
understand how branding works so I never
invest in companies with just about
branding but it is I think a real
phenomenon that that creates a that
creates real value I think one of the
things I'm gonna come back to this a
little bit towards the end but one thing
that's very striking is that software
businesses are often are for some reason
very good at some of these things
they're especially good at the economies
of
part because the marginal cost of
software is zero and so if you get
something that works in software it's
often significantly better than the
existing solution and then you have
these tremendous economies of scale and
you can scale fairly quickly so even if
the markets start small you can grow
your business quickly enough to stay on
stay at the same size as the growing
market and and maintain the sort of
monopoly power now the critical thing
about these monopolies is is it's not
enough to have a monopoly for just a
moment the critical thing is to have one
that lasts over time and so you know in
Silicon Valley is always the sort of
idea that you want to be the first mover
and I always think it's it's in some
ways the better framing is you want to
be the last mover you want to be the
last company in a category those are the
ones that are really valuable Microsoft
was the last operating system at least
for many decades Google is the last
search engine Facebook will be valuable
if it turns out to be the last social
networking site and and one way to one
way to think of this last mover value is
this idea that most of the value in
these companies exists far in the future
if you do sort of a discounted cash flow
analysis of a business you look at you
have sort of all these profit streams
you have a growth rate the growth rates
much higher than the discount rate and
so most of the value exists far in the
future I did I did this exercise at
PayPal in March of 2001 we've been in
business for about 27 months and and we
sort of had you know the growth rate was
a hundred percent a year we were
discounting future cash flows by about
30 percent and it turned out that about
three quarters of the value of the
business as of 2001 came from cash flows
in years 2011 and Beyond and and
whenever you do the math on any of these
tech companies you get an answer that's
something like that so if you are trying
to analyze any of the tech companies in
Silicon Valley Airbnb Twitter Facebook
on any emerging internet companies all
the ones in Y Combinator the math tells
you that three-quarters eighty
85% of the value is coming from cash
flows in years 2024 and beyond it's very
very far in the future and and so one of
the things that we always overvalue in
Silicon Valley is growth rates and we
undervalue durability because a growth
is something you can measure in the here
and now and you can always track that
very precisely the question of whether a
company's still going to be around a
decade from now that's actually what
what dominates the value equation and
that sort of is a much more qualitative
sort of a thing and so if we if we went
back to this idea of these
characteristics of Monopoly proprietary
technology network effects economies of
scale you can think of these these
characteristics as ones that exist at a
moment in time where you capture market
and take it over but you also want to
think about are these things going to
last over time and so there's a time
dimension to all these characteristics
so network effects often have a great
time element where as the network scales
the network effects actually get more
robust and so if you have a network
effect business that's often one that
can become a bigger and stronger
monopoly over time proprietary
technology is always a little bit of a
tricky one so you want something it's
order of magnitude better than the
state-of-the-art in the world today and
that's how you get people's attention
that's how you initially break through
but then you don't want to be superseded
by somebody else and so there are all
these areas of innovation where there
was tremendous innovation but no one
made any money so you know describe
manufacturing in the 1980s you couldn't
you could do it better just build a
better describe than anybody else you
could take over the whole world and two
years later someone else would come
along and replace yours and in the
course of 15 years you got vastly
improved disk drives so we had great
benefit to consumers but it didn't
actually help the people who started
these companies and so there's always
this question about having a huge
breakthrough in technology but then also
being able to say explain why yours will
be the last breakthrough or at least the
last breakthrough for a long time or
will you make a breakthrough
and then you can keep improving on it at
a quick enough pace that no one can ever
catch up so if you have a structure of a
structure of the future where there's a
lot of innovation and other people will
come up with new things in the thing
you're working on that's great for
society it's it's actually not that good
for your business typically and then
economies of scale where I talked about
so so I think anyway so I think this
last mover thing is very critical I'm
always tempted you know that I don't
want to overdo the chess analogies but
you know the first mover in chess is
someone who plays white white is about a
1/3 of a pawn advantage so there's a
small advantage to going first you want
to be the last mover who wins the game
and so as the kappa blanka world
champion a chess champion cattle blanco
line you must begin by studying the
endgame and and I do think that's why I
wouldn't say it's the only thing you
should study
I think this uh the sort of perspective
of asking these questions why will this
still be the leading company 10 15 20
years from now is a is a really critical
one to try to think through let me um
let me sort of I want to sort of going
to slightly other directions with this
monopoly versus competition idea and I
think so I think this is the the central
idea in my mind for business for
starting business for thinking about
them and and there are some very
interesting perspectives I think it
gives on the whole you know on the whole
history of innovation and technology and
science because you know we've lived
through we've lived through you know 250
300 years of incredible technological
progress in you know many many different
domains
you know steam engine - railways to
telephones refrigeration household
appliances you know the computer
revolution aviation all sorts of
different areas of technological
innovation and then there's sort of
analogous thing that one can say about
science where we've lived through
centuries of enormous amounts of
innovation in in in science as well
and and the the thing that I think
people always miss when they think about
these things is is that because x and y
are independent variables some of these
things can be extremely valuable
innovations but the people who invent
them who come up with them do not get
rewarded for this and and certainly if
you go back to UM you need to create X
dollars in value you capture Y percent
of X I would suggest that the history of
science has generally been one where Y
is zero percent across the board the
scientists never make any money
they're always deluded into thinking
that they live in a just universe that
will reward them for their work and for
their inventions and this is probably
the fundamental delusion that the
scientists tend to suffer from in our in
our society and and even in technology
there are sort of many different areas
of Technology where where there were
great innovations that create a
tremendous value for society but but
people did not did not actually capture
that much of the of the value and so I
think there is a sort of whole history
of science and technology that can be
told from the perspective of how much
value was actually captured and and
certainly to our entire sectors where
people didn't capture anything so you
you're the smartest physicist of the
20th century you come up with special
relativity you come up with general
relativity you don't get to be a
billionaire you don't even get to be a
millionaire it just it just somehow
doesn't work that way
the railroads incredibly valuable most
them just went bankrupt because it was
too much competition right brothers you
fly the first plane you don't make any
money and so I think there is sort of a
structure to these industries that's
that's very important and I think the
thing that's actually rare are the
success cases most so it's actually you
really think about the history in this
in this 250 year sweep it's on you why
is almost always zero percent it's
always zero in science it's almost
always in technology and so it's very
rare where people made money you know
the early uh the late
18th early 19th century the first
Industrial Revolution was the textile
mills at the steam engine he sort of
automated things and you had these
relentless improvements that people
improved efficiency of textile factories
of manufacturing generally at a clip of
5 to 7 percent every year year after
year decade after decade you had 60 70
years of tremendous improvement from
1780 to 1850 but even in 1850 most of
the wealth in Britain was still held by
the landed aristocracy the workers
didn't you know the workers didn't make
that much the capitalists didn't make
that much either it was all competed
away there were hundreds of people
running textile factories it was an
industry that just the structure of the
competition prevented people from from
making any money and so I think there
are in my mind there probably are only
two broad categories in the entire
history of the last 250 years where
people have actually come up with new
things and made money doing so one is
these sort of vertically integrated
complex monopolies which people did
build in the Second Industrial
Revolution at the end of the 19th and
started the 20th century and so this is
like Ford it was the vertically
integrated oil companies like Standard
Oil and what these are vertically
integrated monopolies typically required
was this very complex coordination you
got a lot of pieces to fit together in
just the right way when you assembled it
you had a tremendous advantage this is
actually done surprisingly little today
and so I think this is sort of a
Business Forum that when people can pull
it off is very valuable it's typically
fairly capital intensive we live sort of
an in a in a culture where it's very
hard to get people to buy into anything
that's super complicated and takes very
long to build but I you know when I sort
of think about my colleague Elon Musk
from PayPal success with Tesla and
SpaceX I think the key to these
companies was the complex vertically
integrated monopoly structure they had
so if you sort of look at Tesla or
SpaceX I guess you know was there sort
of a single breakthrough and they
certainly innovated on a lot of
dimensions
I don't think there was a single 10x
breakthrough and battery storage or you
know they may be working on some things
in rocketry but they hadn't there was no
sort of single massive breakthrough but
what was really impressive was
integrating all these pieces together
and and doing it in a way that was more
vertically integrated than most of their
competitors so Tesla you also integrated
the card distributors so they wouldn't
steal all the money as has happened with
the rest of the car industry in the US
or SpaceX you basically pulled in all
the subcontractors where most of the
large aerospace companies have single
source subcontractors that are able to
sort of charge monopoly profits and make
it very hard for the integrated
aerospace companies to make money and so
vertical integration I think is sort of
a very under explored modality of
technological progress that people would
would do well to look at more and then I
think there is there is something about
software itself that's very very
powerful software has these incredible
economies of scale these low marginal
costs and there is something about the
world of bits as opposed the world of
atoms where you can often get very fast
adoption and and the fast adoption is
critical to capturing and taking over
markets because even if you have a small
market if the adoption rate is too slow
there'll be enough time for other people
to enter that market and compete with
you whereas if you have a small to
mid-size market and have a fast adoption
rate
you cannot take over this market and so
and so I think this is one of the
reasons Silicon Valley has done so well
and why a software has been of this
phenomenal industry and what I what I
would suggest what I would want to leave
you with is there are sir these
different rationalizations people give
for why certain things work and why
certain things don't work and I think
these rationalizations always obscure
this question of I'm creating X dollars
in value and capturing Y percent of X so
the science rationalization were always
told is that the scientists aren't
interested in making money they're doing
it for charitable reasons and that
you're not a good scientist if you're
motivated by money and I'm not even
saying people should always be motivated
by money or something like this but I
think we should we should be a little
bit
were critical of this as a
rationalization we should ask is this a
rationalization to obscure the fact that
y equals 0% and the scientists are
operating in this in this sort of world
where all the all the innovation is
effectively competed away and they can't
capture any of it directly and then the
the software distortion that often
happens is because people are making
such a vast fortunes and software we
infer that this is the most valuable
thing in the world being done
full-stop and so if people at Twitter
make billions of dollars it must be the
Twitter is worth far more than anything
Einstein did and and and what that sort
of rationalization tends to obscure is
again that x and y are independent
variables and there are these businesses
where you capture a lot of X and there
are others where you don't and so and so
I do think I do think the history of
innovation has been this this history
where the the microeconomics the
structure of these industries has
mattered a tremendous amount and when on
and and and and there is sort of this
this story where some people made vast
fortunes because they were in industries
with the right structure and other
people made nothing at all because
because they were in these sort of very
competitive things and we shouldn't just
rationalize that away I think it's worth
understanding this better and then
finally let me come back to this this
this sort of overarching theme for this
talk this competition is for losers idea
which is always this provocative way to
to title things because we always think
of the losers as the people who are not
good at competing we think of the losers
as the people who are slow on the sports
on the track team in high school or who
do a little bit less well on the
standardized tests and don't get into
the right schools and so we always think
of losers as people who can't compete
and I want us to really rethink and and
revalue this and consider whether it's
possible that competition itself is off
that we'd sort of it's not just the case
we don't understand this monopoly
competition dichotomy intellectually so
the sort been talking about why why you
wouldn't understand it intellectually
because
some people lie about it it's distorted
with all these the history of innovation
rationalizes what's happened in all
these very very strange ways but I think
it's more than just an intellectual
blind-spot I think it's also a
psychological blind spot where we find
ourselves and very very attracted to
competition in one form or another we
find it reassuring if other people do
things the word a poor reading the time
of Shakespeare meant both primate and
imitate and there is something about
human nature that's deeply mimetic
imitative ape like sheep like lemming
like curd like and it's this very very
problematic thing that we need to always
think through and try to overcome and
and there is always this question about
competition as a form of validation
where we we go for things that lots of
other people are going for and it's not
that there is wisdom and crowds it's not
when lots of people are trying to do
something that that's proof of it being
valuable I think it's when lots of
people are trying to do something that
is often that is often proof of insanity
there twenty thousand people a year who
moved to Los Angeles to become movie
stars about twenty of them make it
I think the Olympics are a little bit
better because you have a you know you
can sort of figure out pretty quickly
whether you're good or not so there's a
little bit less of a deadweight loss to
society you know you know you're you're
the sort of educational experience at a
place the the priest Stanford
educational experience there's always
sort of a non-competitive
characterization I think most of the
people in this room had machine guns
they were competing with people with
bows and arrows so it wasn't exactly a
parallel competition when you were in
junior high school in high school
there's always a question does the
tournament make sense as you keep going
and this is uh and so there is always
this question if people go on to grad
school or post postdoctoral education
does the intensity the competition
really make sense there's the the you
know classic Henry Kissinger line that
describing his fellow faculty at Harvard
that the the battles were so ferocious
because the stakes were so small
describing sort of academia and and and
you sort of think on one level this is a
description
insanity you know why would people fight
like crazy when the stakes are so small
but it's also I think simply a function
of the logic of the situation when it's
important to differentiate yourself from
other people when the differences are
when the objective differences really
are small then you have to compete
ferociously to maintain a difference of
one sort or another
that's often more imaginary than real
there's always sort of a personal
version of this that I tell where I was
sort of hyper hyper tracked I in my
eighth grade junior high school yearbook
when my friends wrote in you know I know
you'll get into Stanford in four years
as a sophomore I started winning just
going to Stanford four years later at
the end of high school went to Stanford
Law School you know ended up at a big
law firm in New York where from the
outside everybody wanted to get in on
the inside everybody wanted to leave and
and you had and it was this very strange
dynamic where after I sort of realized
this was maybe not the best idea and I
left after seven months and three days
you know one of the people down the hall
from me told me it's really reassuring
to see you leave Peter I had no idea
that it was possible to escape from
Alcatraz which of course all you had to
do was go out the front door and not
come back but but so much of people's
identities got wrapped up in in winning
these competitions that they somehow
lost sight of what was important what
was valuable you know competition does
make you better at whatever it is that
you're competing on because when you're
competing you're comparing yourself with
the people around you you're figuring
out how do I beat the people next to me
how do I do somewhat better at whatever
it is they're doing and you will get
better at that thing I'm not I'm not
questioning that I'm not denying that
but but it often comes at this
tremendous price that you stopped asking
some bigger questions about what's truly
important and truly valuable and so I
would I would say that don't always go
through the tiny little door that
everyone's trying to rush through maybe
go around the corner and go through the
vast gate that no one's taking thank you
very much
this is time for John take a few
questions
Oh yep people want to take I'll take a
few questions with few minutes time yeah
well I'd say the question I'm I always
try to focus on is what is the actual
market so not what's the narrative of
the market because you always tell a
fictional story about a market that's
much bigger or much smaller but what is
the what is the real objective market so
it's always yeah you always try to
figure it out and you realize people
have incentives to powerfully distort
these things yeah well they have they
have Network effects with the yeah
Network they had proprietary technology
that gave them the initial lead because
they had the the PageRank algorithm
which was sort of an order of magnitude
better than any other search search
engine you have economies of scale
because of the need to store you know
all these different sites and at this
point you have brands so Google has all
four maybe maybe the proprietary
technology somewhat weaker at this point
but definitely it had all four and maybe
three and a half out of four now yeah
that's this sort of a set of companies
that are doing different copycat payment
systems on on mobile phones or square
there's PayPal sort of they have they're
just they just have sort of different
shapes that's how they differentiate
themselves one is trying that one is a
square and so you know maybe at some
point the Apes weren't out of shapes or
something like that but um but I think
um no Palantir we started with focus on
the intelligence community's small sub
market you had a proprietary technology
that used a very very different approach
where it was focused on the human
computer synthesis rather than the
substitution which is I think is the
dominant paradigm so there's a whole set
of things I would say on the on the
market approach and the UH the
proprietary technology
yes yes design thinking methodology and
startup thinking which is used to
mitigate risk by not creating things
that people don't want but young
innovators complex systems yeah so the
question is what I think about lean
startups iterative thinking where you
get feedback from people versus a
complexity that may not work so I I am
personally quite skeptical of all the
Lean Startup methodology I think the the
really great companies did something was
sort of somewhat more of a quantum
improvement that really differentiated
them from everybody else they did they
typically did not do massive you know
customer surveys the people who ran
these companies sometimes now always
suffer from mild forms of Asperger's so
they were not actually that influenced
not that easily deterred by what other
people thought or told them to do so I
do think we're we're way too focused on
iteration as a modality and not enough
on trying to have you know a virtual ESP
link with the public and figuring it out
ourselves I would say that let me see um
I would say that the I'm not quite the
risk question I think is always a very
tricky one because there are you know
they're it's it's not it's often I think
it's often the case that you don't have
enough time to really mitigate risk if
you if you're gonna take enough time to
figure out what people want you often
will have missed the boat by then and
and then of course there's always the
risk of doing something that's that's
not that significant or meaningful so
you know you could say a track and in
law school is a low risk track from one
perspective it may still be a very high
risk track in the sense that maybe you
not have a high risk of not doing
something meaningful with your life so
we have to think about risk in these uh
in these very complicated way I think
risk is for this very complicated
concept yes advantage but then design by
there's really common you
um yeah so there's always this
terminology things I would I would say
that there are there are categories in
which people sort of are bundled
together I would say the monopoly
businesses were in effect they really
were a big first mover in some sense you
could say you could say Google was not
the first search engine there were other
search engines before but on one
dimension they were dramatically better
than everybody else so they were the
first one with PageRank with sort of a
automated approach Facebook was not the
first social networking site my friend
Reid Hoffman started one in 1997 they
called it social net so they already had
the name social networking in the name
of their company seven years before
Facebook their idea was that it was
going to be this virtual cyberspace
where I'd be a dog and you'd be a cat
we'd have all these different rules
about how we'd interact with each other
in this virtual alternate reality
Facebook was the first one to get real
identity so it was so I'd say I hope
this will be the last social networking
site it was the first one in a very
important dimension people often would
not think of it as the first because
they sort of lump all these things
together okay one more question let's
take one here
you know I don't I don't have a I don't
have a great I'm not great at the
psychotherapy stuff so I don't I don't
quite know how to I don't quite know how
to how to solve this that there are
these um you know there are these very
odd studies they've done on people who
go to business school there's one
they've done at Harvard Business School
where it's sort of the anti Asperger
personality we have people are super
extroverted generally have low
convictions few ideas and you have sort
of a hothouse environment you put all
these people in for two years and at the
end of it they systematically end up the
largest cohort systematically ends up
doing the wrong thing they try to catch
the last wave you know 1989 everyone
Harvard try work for Mike Milken it was
one or two years before he went to jail
for all the junk bond stuff they were
never interested in Silicon Valley or
tech except for 99 2000 when they timed
the dot-com bubble peaking perfectly
they did and then you know five 2:07 was
housing private equity stuff like this
so so I do think um I do think this
tendency for us to see competition is
validation is is very deep I don't think
there's some any sort of easy
psychological formula to to avoid it so
I don't I don't quite know how to what
sort of therapy to recommend but but my
my my first my first starting point
which is only like it's maybe 10% of the
way is to never underestimate how big a
problem it is we always think this is
something that afflicts other people so
it's easy for me to point to people in
business schools or people at Harvard or
people on Wall Street I think it
actually does afflict all of us to a
very profound degree we always think of
advertising is things that work on other
people how core all these stupid people
who fall for all those ads on TV they
obviously work to some extent and they
work to disturbing us down on all of us
and it's something we we all should work
to overcome thank you very much
you